explain: Add joins (#3922)
pingcap/docs: explain-joins.md

---
title: Explain Statements Using Joins
summary: Learn about the execution plan information returned by the `EXPLAIN` statement in TiDB.
---

> # Explain Statements Using Joins

Author: I try to if it is relevant in context. The TOC uses the following flow:

- Understanding the Query Execution Plan
- SQL Optimization Process (aka understanding more on how it arrives at plans)
- Control Execution Plans (aka now that you know how the optimizations work, here's how to override them when they are in error)

INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
SELECT SLEEP(1);
ANALYZE TABLE t1, t2;
```

> ## Index Join (Index Nested Loop Join)

Author: Yes we should. I didn't understand this, so I left it from the original document - but I will merge them in.

> ## Index Join (Index Nested Loop Join)

Author: I have added this. @SunRunAway can you review https://github.com/pingcap/docs/commit/1db44f166802ab66711a50782f3bdc2a77e743a1 and make sure it is correct?

> If the estimated rows that need to be joined is small (typically less than 10000 rows), using the Index Join method is preferable. This method of join works similar to the primary method of join used in MySQL. In the following example, the operator `IndexReader_31(Build)` first reads the table `t1`. For each row that matches, TiDB will probe the table `t2`:

Author: Good suggestions, I'll add them. The `IndexReader_31` must have dropped when I rebuilt the examples on more sample data, I'll fix it.

| │ └─TableFullScan_27            | 142020.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t1                     | keep order:false                                                               |
| └─IndexLookUp_9(Probe)          | 1.27      | root      |                              |                                                                                |
|   ├─IndexRangeScan_7(Build)     | 1.27      | cop[tikv] | table:t2, index:t1_id(t1_id) | range: decided by [eq(test.t2.t1_id, test.t1.id)], keep order:false            |
|   └─TableRowIDScan_8(Probe)     | 1.27      | cop[tikv] | table:t2                     | keep order:false                                                               |
+---------------------------------+-----------+-----------+------------------------------+--------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
6 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

Index join is efficient in memory usage, but may be slower to execute than other join methods when a large number of probe operations are required. Consider also the following query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.id=t2.t1_id WHERE t1.pad1 = 'value' and t2.pad1='value';
```

> On an inner join, TiDB will apply join reordering and might access either `t1` or `t2` first. Assuming that TiDB selects `t1` as the first table to apply the `Build` step, it will be able to filter on the predicate `t1.col = 'value'` before probing the table `t2`. The filter for the predicate `t2.col='value'` will be applied on each probe of table `t2`, which may be less efficient than other join methods.

Reviewer: Could we provide a query example showing how we tune Hash Join into Index Join by adding a suitable index for better performance?

+------------------------------+----------+---------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+---------+
6 rows in set (0.37 sec)
```

If the index on `t1.int_col` is not available, the hash join execution plan remains the same. However, the plan changes for the Index Join and performance is reduced:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ALTER TABLE t2 DROP INDEX t1_id; # drop the index
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT /*+ INL_JOIN(t1, t2) */  * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.id = t2.t1_id WHERE t1.int_col = 1;
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT /*+ HASH_JOIN(t1, t2) */  * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.id = t2.t1_id WHERE t1.int_col = 1;
ALTER TABLE t2 ADD INDEX (t1_id); # Re-add the index

> ```

Reviewer: Could we provide such an example? So this can guide users to add an index to speed up their Joins.
```sql
--- a table without index `t1_id`
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.id = t2.t1_id WHERE t1.int_col = 1; --- run Join without hint
--- and get a slow Hash Join result
ALTER TABLE t1 ADD INDEX  t1_id (id);
EXPLAIN ANALYZE SELECT * FROM t1 INNER JOIN t2 ON t1.id = t2.t1_id WHERE t1.int_col = 1; --- run Join without hint
--- and get a fast Index Join result
```

Author: See https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/3922/commits/d3df1326fc80c128bb78ce302119467d04e7ff0a

6 rows in set (0.36 sec)

Query OK, 0 rows affected (3.16 sec)
```

### Variations of Index Join

An index join using the hint [`INL_JOIN`](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_joint1_name--tl_name-) will create a hash table of the intermediate results before joining on the outer table. TiDB also supports creating a hash table on the outer table with the hint [`INL_HASH_JOIN`](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_hash_join). If the column sets on the inner table match the columns of the outer table, the [`INL_MERGE_JOIN`](/optimizer-hints.md#inl_merge_join) index join can apply. Each of these variations of Index Join will be automatically selected by the SQL Optimizer.

### Configuration

Index Join performance is influenced by the following system variables:

* [`tidb_index_join_batch_size`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_join_batch_size) (default: 25000) - the batch size of index lookup operations.
* [`tidb_index_lookup_join_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_index_lookup_join_concurrency) (default: 4) - the number of concurrent index lookup tasks.

> ## Hash Join

Reviewer: Should `Hash Join` be above on `Index Join` because the example in `Index Join` relies on `Hash Join`?

Author: I think because MySQL only had index join until recently, it is better to have index join first. It even says in the second sentence "This method of join works similar to the primary method of join used in MySQL.".

There are two sentences which may be hard to parse:

> Index Join is effective if the build side is small and the probe side is pre-indexed and large. Consider the following query where the index join performs much better than the hash join:

I could reword this and say "where the index join performs well".

> If the index on `t1.int_col` is not available, the hash join execution plan remains the same. However, the plan changes for the Index Join and performance is reduced:

This is in reference to an example, where it can be seen the first example uses INL_JOIN and the second uses HASH_JOIN. I think it is understandable in context that hash join will be explained after.

| └─TableReader_31(Probe)     | 180000.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_30                          |
|   └─TableFullScan_30        | 180000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t2      | keep order:false                               |
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

The execution process of `Hash Join` is as follows:

1. Cache the data of the `Build` side in memory.
2. Construct a Hash Table on the `Build` side based on the cached data.
3. Read the data at the `Probe` side.
4. Use the data of the `Probe` side to probe the Hash Table.
5. Return qualified data to the user.

The operator info column in the `explain` table also records other information about `Hash Join`, including whether the query is Inner Join or Outer Join, and what are the conditions of Join. In the above example, the query is an Inner Join, where the Join condition `equal:[eq(test.t1.id, test.t2.id)]` partly corresponds with the query statement `WHERE t1.id = t2.id`. The operator info of the other Join operators in the following examples is similar to this one.

### Runtime Statistics

> If [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) (default: 1GB) is exceeded, TiDB will attempt to use temporary storage provided that `oom-use-tmp-storage=TRUE` (default). This means that the hash table used as part of the hash join is created on disk. Runtime statistics, such as memory usage are visible in the `execution info` of `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. The following example shows the output of `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` with a 1GB (default) `tidb_mem_quota_query` quota, and a 500MB quota. At 500MB the hash table spills to disk:

Reviewer 2: > This means that the hash table used as part of the hash join is created on disk.

@SunRunAway please confirm: is the build side data cached in memory spilled to disk or the hash table itself is spilled to disk?

Author: I think we should update https://docs.pingcap.com/tidb/stable/system-variables#tidb_mem_quota_query as well so its a bit clearer what this does.

Reviewer: For now, it is that build side data cached in memory spilled to disk, but we should also consider the spilling for hash table in the future.

Reviewer 2: It's better to clearly describe the current behavior on the document. we can update the document once we spilled hash table to disk.

BTW, for technical reasons, it's not recommended to spill hash table to disk. There should be other methods to achieve the same goal.

Author: I have attempted to clarify this in https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/3922/commits/bcb16dd1551c17a9e16abd5fefa027cbd4505778 - PTAL, thx :-)

INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
INSERT INTO t2 SELECT NULL, a.id, RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024), RANDOM_BYTES(1024) FROM t1 a JOIN t1 b JOIN t1 c LIMIT 10000;
UPDATE t1 SET int_col = 1 WHERE pad1 = (SELECT pad1 FROM t1 ORDER BY RAND() LIMIT 1);
SELECT SLEEP(1);
ANALYZE TABLE t1, t2;
```

## Index Join

> If the estimated rows that need to be joined is small (typically less than 10000 rows), using the Index Join method is preferable. This method of join works similar to the primary method of join used in MySQL. In the following example, the operator `├─TableReader_28(Build)` first reads the table `t1`. For each row that matches, TiDB will probe the table `t2`:

Author: MySQL until 8.0.xx unly used this method. It now supports hash join, but the use cases where it will select this are minimal.

I am not sure if we should say "it is recommended", since this implies some action on the user's part, such as a query hint. I would say that typically we should not recommend using hints unless the optimizer selects a very bad plan, or the query is very frequent.

> If the estimated rows that need to be joined is small (typically less than 10000 rows), using the Index Join method is preferable. This method of join works similar to the primary method of join used in MySQL. In the following example, the operator `├─TableReader_28(Build)` first reads the table `t1`. For each row that matches, TiDB will probe the table `t2`:

Reviewer 3: Thanks for explaining!

```

```sql
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
| id                          | estRows   | task      | access object | operator info                                  |
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
| HashJoin_27                 | 142020.00 | root      |               | inner join, equal:[eq(test.t1.id, test.t2.id)] |
| ├─TableReader_29(Build)     | 142020.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_28                          |
| │ └─TableFullScan_28        | 142020.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t1      | keep order:false                               |
| └─TableReader_31(Probe)     | 180000.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_30                          |
|   └─TableFullScan_30        | 180000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t2      | keep order:false                               |
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+------------------------------------------------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

> The execution process of `Hash Join` is as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
The execution process of `HashJoin_27` is as follows:
```

> The execution process of `HashJoin_27` is as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the execution process of `HashJoin_27`, TiDB performs the following operations in order:
```

Reviewer 3: @nullnotnil PTAL is this description acceptable?

Author: Yes.

1. Cache the data of the `Build` side in memory.
2. Construct a Hash Table on the `Build` side based on the cached data.
3. Read the data at the `Probe` side.
4. Use the data of the `Probe` side to probe the Hash Table.

> 5. Return qualified data to the user.

Reviewer 3: Are the logical subjects of the 5 sentences (execution process) all `TiDB`?

Author: Yes, this is all TiDB.

> The operator info column in the `explain` table also records other information about `Hash Join`, including whether the query is Inner Join or Outer Join, and what are the conditions of Join. In the above example, the query is an Inner Join, where the Join condition `equal:[eq(test.t1.id, test.t2.id)]` partly corresponds with the query statement `WHERE t1.id = t2.id`. The operator info of the other Join operators in the following examples is similar to this one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `operator info` column in the `EXPLAIN` result table also records other information about `Hash Join`, including whether the query is Inner Join or Outer Join, and what are the conditions of Join. In the above example, the query is an Inner Join, where the Join condition `equal:[eq(test.t1.id, test.t2.id)]` partly corresponds with the query condition `WHERE t1.id = t2.id`. The operator info of the other Join operators in the following examples is similar to this one.
```

### Runtime Statistics

> If [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) (default: 1GB) is exceeded, TiDB will attempt to use temporary storage provided that `oom-use-tmp-storage=TRUE` (default). This means that the `Build` operator used as part of the hash join might be created on disk. Runtime statistics, such as memory usage are visible in the `execution info` of `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`. The following example shows the output of `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` with a 1GB (default) `tidb_mem_quota_query` quota, and a 500MB quota. At 500MB disk is used for temporary storage:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) (default value: 1GB) is exceeded, TiDB will attempt to use temporary storage on condition that the `oom-use-tmp-storage` value is `true` (default). This means that the `Build` operator used as part of the hash join might be created on disk. Runtime statistics such as memory usage are visible in the `execution info` of the `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` result table. The following example shows the output of `EXPLAIN ANALYZE` with a 1GB (default) `tidb_mem_quota_query` quota, and a 500MB quota. At 500MB, disk is used for temporary storage:
```

|   └─TableFullScan_30        | 180000.00 | 90000   | cop[tikv] | table:t2      | proc max:92ms, min:64ms, p80:92ms, p95:92ms, iters:102, tasks:3                                                                                                                                                                                          | keep order:false                               | N/A                   | N/A                  |
+-----------------------------+-----------+---------+-----------+---------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+------------------------------------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
5 rows in set (0.98 sec)
```

### Configuration

Hash Join performance is influenced by the following system variables:

> * [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) (default: 1GB) - if the memory quota for a query is exceeded, TiDB will attempt to spill the `Build` operator of a hash join to disk to save memory.
> * [`tidb_hash_join_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_hash_join_concurrency) (default: 5) - the number of concurrent hash join tasks.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [`tidb_mem_quota_query`](/system-variables.md#tidb_mem_quota_query) (default value: 1GB) - if the memory quota for a query is exceeded, TiDB will attempt to spill the `Build` operator of a hash join to disk to save memory.
* [`tidb_hash_join_concurrency`](/system-variables.md#tidb_hash_join_concurrency) (default value: `5`) - the number of concurrent hash join tasks.
```

## Merge Join

> Merge join is a special sort of join that applies when both sides of the join are read in sorted order. It can be described as similar to an _efficient zipper merge_, in that as data is read on both the `Build` and the `Probe` side of the join it can be compared as a streaming operation. Merge joins require far less memory than hash join, but do not execute in parallel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Merge join is a special sort of join that applies when both sides of the join are read in sorted order. It can be described as similar to an _efficient zipper merge_: as data is read on both the `Build` and the `Probe` sides of the join, the join operation works like a streaming operation. Merge joins require far less memory than hash join but do not execute in parallel.
```

```

```sql
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| id                          | estRows   | task      | access object | operator info                                         |
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| MergeJoin_7                 | 142020.00 | root      |               | inner join, left key:test.t1.id, right key:test.t2.id |
| ├─TableReader_12(Build)     | 180000.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_11                                 |
| │ └─TableFullScan_11        | 180000.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t2      | keep order:true                                       |
| └─TableReader_10(Probe)     | 142020.00 | root      |               | data:TableFullScan_9                                  |
|   └─TableFullScan_9         | 142020.00 | cop[tikv] | table:t1      | keep order:true                                       |
+-----------------------------+-----------+-----------+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
5 rows in set (0.00 sec)
```

> The execution of the `Merge Join` operator is as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The execution process of the `Merge Join` operator is as follows:
```

> 1. Read all the data of a Join Group from the `Build` side into the memory

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Read all the data of a Join Group from the `Build` side into the memory.
```

> The execution process of the `Merge Join` operator is as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the execution process of the `Merge Join` operator, TiDB performs the following operations:
```
